New guide monitoring non-static thresholds (#19847)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/monitors/guide/non_static_thresholds.md

Watchdog powered monitors (namely [anomaly][1] and [outlier][2]) can help in such situations where you don't have an explicit definition of when your metric is off-track. However, a better alternative is deterministic alerting conditions. Watchdog monitors are useful when you don't know what to monitor, as they look at APM performance, infrastructure metrics, and logs. However, it requires two weeks of data for any new source of metrics, logs, or other data, to establish a baseline of expected behavior.

If you know what you want to monitor, it's better to create your own monitor so it can alert you faster and more accurately. This guide covers a series of the most common deterministic use-cases:  
  - [Alert on a metric that goes off track on top of seasonal variations](#seasonal-threshold) 
  - [Alert on spikes when you don't know the baseline ahead of time](#spike-threshold)
  - [Alert based on how the metric compares with the value of another reference metric](#reference-threshold)

## Seasonal threshold

### Context

> 

Reviewer: Can we add a screenshot here showing a metric with this seasonal pattern

To count the number of indexed logs in Datadog use the following metric: [`datadog.estimated_usage.logs.ingested_events`][4].
It is an out-of-the-box metric that can be found in your account after logs are sent to Datadog. For more information on log usage metrics, see the [Log Configuration][5] documentation.

The monitor evaluates the sum over the last 5 minutes compared to the average of the last hour. It is composed of 2 queries:
- Query A represents the last 5 minutes of the metric you want to be aware of, because of the parameter "Evaluate the … of the query over the last 5 minutes".
- Query B represents the average value of the same metric over the past hour thanks to the moving rollup, which takes the datapoints of the last 4 hours (to have a large amount of datapoints) and calculates the average.

When the value of Query A is much higher than the value of Query B, it's a sign of a substantial and sudden increase in usage which you can capture with a ratio between A and B.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "UI Configuration" %}}

{{< img src="monitors/guide/non_static_thresholds/spike_threshold.png" alt="Spike threshold config with two log usage metrics" style="width:100%;" >}}

> In the formula, divide **Query A** by **Query B** and multiply the quotient by the moving rollup to account for the difference in evaluation windows between the two queries. In this example, since the moving rollup of Query B is 4 hours (240 minutes), you multiply the formula with 48 (240 minutes / 5 minute evaluation window).	

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the formula, divide **Query A** by **Query B** and multiply the quotient by the moving rollup to account for the difference in evaluation windows between the two queries. In this example, since the moving rollup of Query B is 4 hours (240 minutes), you multiply the formula by 48 (240 minutes / 5 minute evaluation window).	
```

The threshold here is 2, to get an alert when the difference in value is double or higher.

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "JSON Example" %}}
```
{
	"name": "[Spike threshold] Log Spike",
	"type": "query alert",
	"query": "sum(last_5m):(sum:datadog.estimated_usage.logs.ingested_events{env:prod}.as_count() / moving_rollup(sum:datadog.estimated_usage.logs.ingested_events{env:prod}.as_count(), 14400, 'sum')) * 48 > 2",
	"message": "Be careful! There has been a difference of {{value}} in Log ingestion between now and the past 4 hours!",
	"tags": [],
	"options": {
		"thresholds": {
			"critical": 2
		},
		"notify_audit": false,
		"require_full_window": false,
		"notify_no_data": false,
		"renotify_interval": 0,
		"include_tags": false
	}
}
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Reference threshold

### Context

> You are the QA team lead, in charge of the checkout process of your e-commerce website. You want to make sure that your customers can have a good experience and can purchase your products without any issues. One indicator of that is the error rate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You are the QA team lead, in charge of the checkout process of your e-commerce website. You want to ensure that your customers have a good experience and can purchase your products without any issues. One indicator of that is the error rate.
```

> The traffic is not the same throughout the day, so 50 errors/minutes on a Friday evening is not as worrying as 50 errors/minute on a Sunday morning. Monitoring an error rate rather than the errors themselves gives you a reliable view of what healthy and unhealthy metrics look like.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The traffic is not the same throughout the day, so 50 errors/minute on a Friday evening is less worrying than 50 errors/minute on a Sunday morning. Monitoring an error rate rather than the errors themselves gives you a reliable view of what healthy and unhealthy metrics look like.
```

Get alerted when the error rate is high, but also when the volume of hits is significant enough.

### Monitor

Create 3 monitors in total:
1. [Metric monitor to alert on total number of hits.](#metric-monitor-to-alert-on-total-number-of-hits)
1. [Metric monitor to calculate the error rate.](#metric-monitor-to-calculate-the-error-rate)
1. [Composite monitor that triggers an alert if the first two monitors are in an ALERT state.](#composite-monitor)

> #### Metric monitor to alert on total number of hits

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Metric monitor to alert on the total number of hits
```

> The first monitor tracks the total number of hits, both successes and failures. This monitor is used to know whether the error rate should trigger an alert.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first monitor tracks the total number of hits, both successes and failures. This monitor determines whether the error rate should trigger an alert.
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "UI Configuration" %}}
  {{< img src="monitors/guide/non_static_thresholds/reference_total_hits.png" alt="Metric monitor configuration with formula to calculate total hits" style="width:100%;" >}}

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "JSON Example" %}}
```
{
	"name": "Number of hits",
	"type": "query alert",
	"query": "sum(last_5m):sum:shopist.checkouts.failed{env:prod} by {region}.as_count() + sum:shopist.checkouts.success{env:prod} by {region}.as_count() > 4000",
	"message": "There has been more than 4000 hits for this region !",
	"tags": [],
	"options": {
		"thresholds": {
			"critical": 1000
		},
		"notify_audit": false,
		"require_full_window": false,
		"notify_no_data": false,
		"renotify_interval": 0,
		"include_tags": true,
		"new_group_delay": 60
	}
}

```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

#### Metric monitor to calculate the error rate

> The second monitor calculates the error rate. Create a query on the number of errors divided by the total number of hits to get the error rate `a / a+b`, as follow:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second monitor calculates the error rate. Create a query on the number of errors divided by the total number of hits to get the error rate `a / a+b`:
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "UI Configuration" %}}
  {{< img src="monitors/guide/non_static_thresholds/reference_error_rate.png" alt="Metric monitor configuration with formula to calculate error rate" style="width:100%;" >}}
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "JSON Example" %}}
```
{
	"name": "Error Rate",
	"type": "query alert",
	"query": "sum(last_5m):sum:shopist.checkouts.failed{env:prod} by {region}.as_count() / (sum:shopist.checkouts.failed{env:prod} by {region}.as_count() + sum:shopist.checkouts.success{env:prod} by {region}.as_count()) > 0.5",
	"message": "The error rate is currently {{value}} ! Be careful !",
	"tags": [],
	"options": {
		"thresholds": {
			"critical": 0.5
		},
		"notify_audit": false,
		"require_full_window": false,
		"notify_no_data": false,
		"renotify_interval": 0,
		"include_tags": true,
		"new_group_delay": 60
	}
}

```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

#### Composite monitor

> The last monitor is a Composite monitor, which sends and alert only if the two preceding monitors are also in an **ALERT** state. The monitor sends out an alert only if both monitors are in an ALERT state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The last monitor is a Composite monitor, which sends an alert only if the two preceding monitors are also both in an **ALERT** state. 
```

In the formula, divide **Query A** by **Query B** and multiply the quotient by the moving rollup to account for the difference in evaluation windows between the two queries. In this example, since the moving rollup of Query B is 4 hours (240 minutes), you multiply the formula by 48 (240 minutes / 5 minute evaluation window).	

The threshold here is 2, to get an alert when the difference in value is double or higher.

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "JSON Example" %}}
```
{
	"name": "[Spike threshold] Log Spike",
	"type": "query alert",
	"query": "sum(last_5m):(sum:datadog.estimated_usage.logs.ingested_events{env:prod}.as_count() / moving_rollup(sum:datadog.estimated_usage.logs.ingested_events{env:prod}.as_count(), 14400, 'sum')) * 48 > 2",
	"message": "Be careful! There has been a difference of {{value}} in Log ingestion between now and the past 4 hours!",
	"tags": [],
	"options": {
		"thresholds": {
			"critical": 2
		},
		"notify_audit": false,
		"require_full_window": false,
		"notify_no_data": false,
		"renotify_interval": 0,
		"include_tags": false
	}
}
```
{{% /tab %}}

> {{< /tabs >}}

Reviewer 3: We can remove this part of the guide for now since the monitor is not working as expected.

The second monitor calculates the error rate. Create a query on the number of errors divided by the total number of hits to get the error rate `a / a+b`:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "UI Configuration" %}}
  {{< img src="monitors/guide/non_static_thresholds/reference_error_rate.png" alt="Metric monitor configuration with formula to calculate error rate" style="width:100%;" >}}
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "JSON Example" %}}
```
{
	"name": "Error Rate",
	"type": "query alert",
	"query": "sum(last_5m):sum:shopist.checkouts.failed{env:prod} by {region}.as_count() / (sum:shopist.checkouts.failed{env:prod} by {region}.as_count() + sum:shopist.checkouts.success{env:prod} by {region}.as_count()) > 0.5",
	"message": "The error rate is currently {{value}} ! Be careful !",
	"tags": [],
	"options": {
		"thresholds": {
			"critical": 0.5
		},
		"notify_audit": false,
		"require_full_window": false,
		"notify_no_data": false,
		"renotify_interval": 0,
		"include_tags": true,
		"new_group_delay": 60
	}
}

```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

#### Composite monitor

The last monitor is a Composite monitor, which sends an alert only if the two preceding monitors are also both in an **ALERT** state. 

> {{< img src="monitors/guide/non_static_thresholds/reference_composite_monitor_config.png" alt="Example composite monitor configuration showing boolean logic to alert if both monitors are in ALERT state" style="width:100%;" >}} -->

Reviewer 3: I believe the arrow at the end of the line 229 should be removed, no?

Author: Yes! Thanks for catching this!
